KHR_mesh_quantization (#1673)
KhronosGroup/glTF: extensions/2.0/Khronos/KHR_quantized_geometry/README.md

This extension expands the set of allowed component types for geometry storage to provide a memory/precision tradeoff - depending on the application needs, 16-bit or 8-bit storage can be sufficient.

Using 16-bit or 8-bit storage typically requires transforming the original floating point values to fit a uniform 3D or 2D grid; the process is commonly known as quantization.

To simplify implementation requirements, the extension relies on existing ways to specify geometry transformation instead of adding special dequantization transforms to the schema.

As an example, a static PBR-ready mesh typically requires `POSITION` (12 bytes), `TEXCOORD` (8 bytes), `NORMAL` (12 bytes) and `TANGENT` (16 bytes) for each vertex, for a total of 48 bytes. With this extension, it is possible to use `SHORT` to store position and texture coordinate data (8 and 4 bytes, respectively) and `BYTE` to store normal and tangent data (4 bytes each), for a total of 20 bytes per vertex with often negligible quality impact.

> Because the extension does not provide a way to specify both `FLOAT` and quantized versions of the data, files that use the extension should specify it in `extensionsRequired` list - the extension is not optional.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because the extension does not provide a way to specify both `FLOAT` and quantized versions of the data, files that use the extension must specify it in `extensionsRequired` array - the extension is not optional.
```

> **Implementation Note:** As quantization may introduce a non-negligible error, quantized normal and tangent vectors are typically not exactly unit length. Applications are expected to normalize the vectors before using them in lighting equations; this typically can be done after transforming them using the normal matrix. Even if quantization is not used, normal matrix can contain scale/skew so normalization is typically required anyway.

## Extending Morph Target Attributes

When `KHR_quantized_geometry` extension is supported, the set of types used for storing morph target attributes is expanded according to the table below.

|Name|Accessor Type(s)|Component Type(s)|Description|
|----|----------------|-----------------|-----------|

> |`POSITION`|`"VEC3"`|`5126`&nbsp;(FLOAT)<br>`5120`&nbsp;(BYTE)<br>`5120`&nbsp;(BYTE)&nbsp;normalized<br>`5122`&nbsp;(SHORT)<br>`5122`&nbsp;(SHORT)&nbsp;normalized|XYZ vertex position displacements|

Reviewer: Why only signed types here? Given that target weights can be negative, some use-cases probably may benefit from better precision of unsigned types.

Author: Hmm - I'm up for adding this, but I don't have specific use cases in mind. True, target weights can be negative, but the weight is applied to the entire target - so to be able to store unsigned deltas, every single component of every single vertex must have a consistent sign and I'm not sure this can happen in practice.

## Decoding Quantized Data

Depending on the attribute values and component types used, the attributes may need to be transformed into their original range for display. Instead of relying on separate dequantization transform, this extension relies on existing methods to specify transformation.

For `POSITION` attribute, the transform can be specified in one of two ways:

- For non-skinned meshes, the dequantization transform (which typically consists of scale and offset) can be encoded into `node` transformation - this can require adding an extra leaf `node` so that animations that affect the mesh transformation are not disturbed.

- For skinned meshes, the `node` hierarchy does not affect the transform of the `mesh` directly - however, dequantization transform can be encoded into `inverseBindMatrices` for the `skin` used for the mesh.

In both cases, to preserve the direction of normal/tangent vectors, it is recommended that the quantization scale specified in the transform is uniform across X/Y/Z axes.

> For `TEXCOORD` attribute, the transform can be specified using the `offset`/`scale` supplied by `KHR_texture_transform` extension.

Reviewer: Maybe, add here that `offset`/`scale` values present before quantization would be merged with quantization params, so there's no way to "recover" original UVs.

Author: Good point - added.

> **Implementation Note:** It is also possible to determine the range of all attributes of all meshes in the scene and use a shared dequantization transform; this can eliminate the gaps between different meshes but can increase the quantization error.

Implementations should assume following equations are used to get corresponding floating-point value `f` from a normalized integer `c` and should use the specified equations to encode floating-point values to integers after range normalization:

|`accessor.componentType`|int-to-float|float-to-int|
|-----------------------------|--------|----------------|
| `5120`&nbsp;(BYTE)          |`f = max(c / 127.0, -1.0)`|`c = round(f * 127.0)`|
| `5121`&nbsp;(UNSIGNED_BYTE) |`f = c / 255.0`|`c = round(f * 255.0)`|
| `5122`&nbsp;(SHORT)         |`f = max(c / 32767.0, -1.0)`|`c = round(f * 32767.0)`|
| `5123`&nbsp;(UNSIGNED_SHORT)|`f = c / 65535.0`|`c = round(f * 65535.0)`|

> > **Implementation Note:** Due to OpenGL ES 2.0 / WebGL 1.0 restrictions, some implementations may decode signed normalized integers to floating-point values differently. While the difference is unlikely to be significant for normal/tangent data, implementations may want to use unsigned normalized or signed non-normalized formats to avoid the discrepancy in position data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **Implementation Note:** Due to OpenGL ES 2.0 / WebGL 1.0 platform differences, some implementations may decode signed normalized integers to floating-point values differently. While the difference is unlikely to be significant for normal/tangent data, implementations may want to use unsigned normalized or signed non-normalized formats to avoid the discrepancy in position data.
```
